Roshni Parulekar-Martins, Michael Samuel, Jason Wang, Sharon Zhu  
March 3, 2024 

# Tackling FOXP1 through Amino Acid Sequence Analysis

The Forkhead box protein P1 (FOXPI) is a transcription factor encoded by the FOXP gene in humans. This protein plays a crucial role in the proper development of the brain, heart, and lung in mammals. It is a member of the large FOX family of transcription factors, which are vital in regulating the expression of other genes. FOXP1 syndrome, a rare disease, is caused by mutations or changes to the FOXP1 gene. This syndrome is associated with intellectual disability, language deficits, autism spectrum disorder, hypotonia, and congenital anomalies, including mild dysmorphic features, and brain, cardiac, and urogenital abnormalities. Thus, FOXP1 plays a significant role in human development and its disruption can lead to a range of developmental delays and medical needs. 

For the Harvard Rare Diseases Hackathon, our team focused on analyzing and characterizing mutants of FOXP1 with particularly highly pathogenicity. To do this, the team first delved into identifying point mutations of FOXP1 that have either been reported to, or predicted to, confer instability and phenotypic changes. Using Alpha Missense, a program that generates a comprehensive list of mutant proteins with single point mutations and their associated pathogenicity scores. Because this score reflects the severity of the mutation in the pathway and physiological phenotype, we then filtered the mutants by pathogenic text of its id primarily looked at those with a higher score. 

At first, we input a random sampling of the mutant molecules into a protein-protein interaction software called PEPPI. We were looking to assess whether high scoring proteins for pathogenicity would impact dimerization so drastically that the key function of FOXP1, to act as a transcription factor, is affected. However, this method didn't provide significant changes in dimerization, and we quickly realized that dimerization problems would be more localized towards specific domains. 

We used Uniprot to annotate the wild-type FOXP1 protein, finding protein and DNA binding domains. We then coded a Python script for filtering the Uniprot data for specific domains and their predicted function. For example, certain domains may be specific for DNA binding or dimerization. 

Combining what we learned from Alpha Missense and Uniprot, we then mapped the mutations to the protein domains, trying from scratch to create an algorithm for k-means clustering, a powerful unsupervised machine learning algorithm, to make this more efficient so that the method can be generalized for larger datasets. This allows us to identify which domains stand out as likely candidates for causing pathogenicity, and thus, which domains would be good targets for treatment or further research.

Specifically, we hypothesize that because FOXP1 dimerizes with co-transcription factors FOXP2 and FOXP4, certain mutations may affect this dimerization and cause numerous down-stream effects as DNA binding is affected. Similarly, FOXP1 has DNA binding sites that would cause similar effects when mutated, such as the CC10 promoter. Additionally, we hypothesize that FOXP1 has many domains for binding with upstream proteins, so FOXP1 may never be "activated" to do its function when mutated. 

To verify our hypotheses, we then analyzed which cellular pathways were impacted by a point mutation, and which domain that was associated with. This allowed us to find out which domains were associated with higher pathogenicity, without having to model protein-protein and protein-DNA interaction, both of which are time-consuming and not accurate enough at this point to be reasonable for analyzing large datasets of single point mutations. 

This suggests that a possible future direction of this project would be the development of a model that can handle multimers, taking a multimerized molecule and the binding affinities of the individual chains in the multimer as estimated by the extant protein-DNA binding models. 

Additionally, this workflow we created can be further used on other proteins, whether they are transcription factors or not, because it does not rely on analyzing interactions with other molecules, simply a pre-existing score that's efficient to analyze. By identifying the most important domains, we get one step closer to being able to predict rare diseases before the symptoms show, and borrow precious time for developing personalized medicine that could save lives. 

We would like to emphasize the importance of efficiency. It takes anywhere from 20-100+ minutes to analyze interactions between large proteins, such as FOXP1 with 677 residues. We had over 2000 point mutations, all with some chance of pathogenicity. Additionally, we were not able to find a software that takes into consideration multimers, such as that formed when FOXPl and FOXP2 dimerize, in analysis of protein-DNA interaction. Ideally, if these processes were time-efficient, it would be simpler to model what exactly goes on with FOXPI mutations. Unfortunately, they are not, and patients still have these rare diseases. Therefore, the solution in the meantime is to remove this inefficiency by utilizing existing databases, and spend time and utilize machine learning to find domains for further monitoring. This allows sequencing to be more individualized for patients and healthcare providers, hopefully meaning rare diseases are generalized less. Lumping rare diseases together by a general factor is often the first barrier to effective treatment, and our workflow makes analyzing genomes more accessible, and therefore more likely to be used in a clinical setting for diagnosing patients.
